---
layout: post
title: Easy way to improve DbEntityValidationException of Entity Framework
comments: true
permalink: blog/improving-dbentityvalidationexception
redirect_from: /improving-dbentityvalidationexception/
---

`DbEntityValidationException` is the exception thrown by Entity Framework when entity validation fails. While this exception is extremely valuable, the exception message omits the most important bit of information: **The actual validation errors**. In this blog, I present a quick and easy way to unwrap and rethrow these exceptions with a more meaningful message.

Developers who have used Entity Framework are probably familiar with the following message:

> System.Data.Entity.Validation.DbEntityValidationException: Validation failed for one or more entities. See 'EntityValidationErrors' property for more details.

This message is quite clear in its intent: Something isn’t valid and if you want to find out what that is then you should attach a debugger and inspect the exception. While this is certainly a valid approach, attaching debuggers isn’t always practical (e.g. production environments). Moreover, being the lazy developer I am, I don’t want to attach a debugger to find out what field caused the error: I want the exception message to tell me in the first place!

## A bit of (db)context please

`DbEntityValidationException` is thrown by the `SaveChanges` method which resides on the `DbContext` class. Fortunately, you can override the default behavior of `SaveChanges`. Assuming you use a database-first approach, your Visual Studio solution should contain a bunch of files like these:

* Northwind.cs
* Northwind.Context.cs
* Northwind.Context.tt
* Northwind.Designer.cs
* Northwind.edmx
* Northwind.edmx.diagram
* Northwind.tt

Northwind.Context.cs is the file of interest here. This file is automatically generated by Northwind.Context.tt. It describes the class you use in code to perform operations on the database. This class inherits from `DbContext`, which in turn contains `SaveChanges`, the method responsible for throwing the `DbEntityValidationException`. This method is virtual and can thus be overridden. However, changing Northwind.Context.cs is not recommended since the tt-file will overwrite this file on any change to the EDMX. Luckily, the class itself is partial, which means you can add your own class to the solution.

## Two steps to victory

 1. First, create a new partial class in the same location as where your EDMX resides. In my example, I called the file NorthwindEntities.cs, which is also the name of the class.
 2. Second, use the following piece of C# code to override the SaveChanges implementation.

```c#
public partial class NorthwindEntities
{
    public override int SaveChanges()
    {
        try
        {
            return base.SaveChanges();
        }
        catch (DbEntityValidationException ex)
        {
            // Retrieve the error messages as a list of strings.
            var errorMessages = ex.EntityValidationErrors
                    .SelectMany(x => x.ValidationErrors)
                    .Select(x => x.ErrorMessage);

            // Join the list to a single string.
            var fullErrorMessage = string.Join("; ", errorMessages);

            // Combine the original exception message with the new one.
            var exceptionMessage = string.Concat(ex.Message, " The validation errors are: ", fullErrorMessage);

            // Throw a new DbEntityValidationException with the improved exception message.
            throw new DbEntityValidationException(exceptionMessage, ex.EntityValidationErrors);
        }
    }
}
```

That’s it! The rest of your code will automatically use the overridden `SaveChanges` so you don’t have to change anything else. From now on, your exceptions will look like this:

> System.Data.Entity.Validation.DbEntityValidationException: Validation failed for one or more entities. See 'EntityValidationErrors' property for more details. The validation errors are: The field PhoneNumber must be a string or array type with a maximum length of '12'; The LastName field is required.

The `DbEntityValidationException` also contains the entities that caused the validation errors. So if you require even more information, you can change the above code to output information about these entities.

I hope this blog saves you time debugging, so you can spend more time writing awesome code instead! :-)